Extra examples modelling & statistics
Here are some additional examples for lectures 8 and 9. Here are some notes to accompany the slides:

When viewing data as generated from some model, with inherent statistical uncertainty, we expect our data to follow some distribution around the model at every "x", which may depend on x itself.
When we sample the likelihood/posterior landscape with an MCMC method, we have a higher resolution where the probability is high, since we sample ergodically. This means that even without recalculating likelihoods at all parameter sets in the chain, the density of chain steps in likelihood space is itself a measure of the likelihood, which can be useful for e.g. visualisation purposes.
Sometimes the Poisson distribution is the correct one (i.e. the one inherent to how the data was realized) but it's not obvious. For example, when the data is represented by decimal numbers between 0 and 1, which look continuous – but may not be, if the data is actually N/Ntot, with N and Ntot integers. Or, we are looking at a spectrum, but are not in the limit of a high number of photon counts everywhere.
I added a lot of slides for the specific example of fitting a stellar initial mass function to a field of N stars, for N=10000, 1000 or 100. As N decreases, there are more bins with a low number of counts or even 0 in the realization, and using the right distribution (here Poisson) matters more and more for a bias in our fit. But, random chance is still a factor: for any particular realization, it may still be that e.g. a chi-squared gives an answer closer to the true model than Poisson – as I show, however, this is not true on average.
Finally, I show that if I can do many realizations of the true model and perform G-tests for the fits, that the values I get out of the G-test indeed follow the chi-squared distribution – but not if I use a completely wrong model, e.g. implicitly assuming Gaussian uncertainties with constant variance in this case, i.e. least-squares (so the hypothesis that the model is correct is rejected often – though not always).